# Coursera - Getting and Cleaning Data - Final Project

This project aims to clean and prepare the dataset from the UCI Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Dataset to a *tidy* format. This format follows the rules defined by Hadley Wickham in his article *Tidy Data*. The rules are:
<ul><li>Each variable forms a column.</li>
<li>Each observation forms a row.</li>
<li>Each type of observational unit forms a table.</li></ul>

Files discription:
<ul><li>run_analysis.R: R script with the code for processing the dataset stored in a folder called *UCI HAR Dataset* and creates archives storing the resulting tidy dataset in a folder called *Tidy Dataset*.</li>
<li>CodeBook.md: Markdown file with the discriptions of the data generated by the R script and also some explanation on how the data was processed.</li></ul>

## Data

The raw data was separated in two sets: "test" and "train". Both sets had the same kind of variables so, following the tidy data rules, they had to be put together.
In each set, there were the following data tables with the following data:
<ul>
<li>Features</li>
<li>Subjecs</li>
<li>Activities</li>
<li>9 tables with the values for body linear acceleration, body angular velocity and total linear acceleration on each axis (x, y and z)</li>
</ul>

There were also other files with the labels for the activities and the features.

#### Readings table

The 9 tables with the accelerations and velocities were obtained with readings from the accelerometer and gyroscope of the smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) and, therefore composed of a single type of variable and should be put together in a single table.  
For that, it was necessary to melt the data tables individually before binding them together, for each set, and, then, bind the resulting tables from each set together as well.

#### Features table

Then the features were decided to form another type of variable, since they were calculated later with the data from what now is the *readings* table. This one required to use the feature labels to name the columns properly and, then, filter only the columns needed, which were the means and standard deviations ones.  
Again, the data had to be molten and the labels had to be cleaned so that the names would be more meaningful.

#### Subjects and activities data

The subjects and activities were part of the raw data, but they weren't obtained through readings of the smartphone. Because of that, they were decided to be put together as another type of variable.  
Their data was almost tidy the way they came, only requiring to bind them and to change the data for activities from numerical code to the respective strings, so that it would be more intuitive to use.

**NOTE**: The tidy data was structured in three tables with one of them being very long. I submitted a single file with the three of them, as it was requested, but the work was ideally thought to be of three files, with index columns (of variables *set* and *window*) to allow communication between tables.  
In the single file, the first table is the *subjectsactivities*, the second (starting at line 10,301) is the *readings* and the third is the *features* (starting at line 1,328,574)
